1/ http://www.oncotarget.com/index.php?journal=oncotarget&page=article&op=view&path[]=15695&path[]=50191

...

p. XXY

Metastasis is a highly complex multi-step process that involves a continual and reciprocal dialog between the tumor cells and the systemic and local microenvironments [8]. The steps involved include escape of tumor cells from the primary tumor site by intravasation, passage through the circulation to distant organs, extravasation and successful colonization of the distant site. Every step poses multiple challenges to the survival of the tumor cell, which has to face and evade threats that include loss of attachment-based survival signals, physical damage, active immune surveillance and consequences of interacting with inhospitable microenvironments to which it is not adapted. Thus in an ideal world, therapeutic intervention studies for metastasis would be performed in autochthonous models, such as the genetically engineered mouse (GEM) models, where the tumor and host components can co-evolve as they would for the human disease. However, there are very few existing GEM models of breast cancer that metastasize with a reasonable efficiency. The most widely-used metastatic GEM model of breast cancer is the MMTV-PyVT model, in which female mice show an ~90% incidence of lung metastases by 100 days of age [7]. The MMTV-Neu model is also metastatic, but with a lower incidence (~50%) and with a longer time-frame to development of clinically significant metastatic disease ( > 1 year) [9]. Metastasis from other intact GEM models is even less efficient, making GEM models more useful for natural history studies of the metastatic process than for therapeutic intervention studies.

For the purposes of cost-effective drug screening in vivo, metastatic models with a high efficiency of metastasis and a shorter time-frame are needed. Currently these requirements can only be met using transplantation models. Ideally such models should capture at least some of the heterogeneity of human breast cancer. Additionally, it is increasingly appreciated that the full efficacy of conventional and targeted therapeutic approaches frequently depends in part on activation of anti-tumor immune responses [10]. Thus models with an intact immune system are desirable for development of most therapeutic strategies, not just immunotherapy. To address some of these issues in breast cancer, we have assembled a panel of 12 metastatic mouse mammary tumor cell line models for use in syngeneic, fully immunocompetent hosts. Here we describe the clinico-pathologic, genomic and transcriptomic characterization of these models. We explore their relationship to human breast cancer and address their advantages and challenges for the development of anti-metastasis therapies.

...

p. XX

Relatedness to human patient derived xenografts
Human patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) are increasingly being explored as useful avatars of human disease [37]. We assessed the transcriptomic relatedness of the immunocompetent mouse allograft models to a published panel of 25 human breast cancer PDXs [38]. After normalization and batch effect removal, unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the merged datasets showed that mouse model cluster 1 (predominantly M6 and MET1) clustered in the same arm of the dendrogram as the human PDXs while mouse cluster 2 and cluster 3 were distinct (Figure 7). The mouse cluster 1 allografts were more closely related to the human basal PDXs than the human HER2 PDXs, which occupied a separate arm on the dendrogram. No luminal PDXs were represented in this dataset. The biological basis of the transcriptomic relatedness of the mouse cluster 1 models to the human PDXs needs to be further explored, but could in part reflect the observation that the cluster 1 models mouse are predicted to be relatively immunologically silent, and the human PDXs were implanted in immunodeficient mouse hosts.

...

p. XX

Relationship of mouse models to PDXs
Patient-derived tumor xenografts are an emerging tool for drug development or selection studies. They largely recapitulate the histological and transcriptomic characteristics of the original tumor [40], and to the extent that it has been tested, the response of the PDX to drugs correlates well with clinical outcome when the patient is treated with a drug selected through a PDX screen [47]. Thus there is hope that PDXs will enable precision medicine approaches to cancer therapy. Realistically, the routine generation of PDXs from every individual patient is likely to be cost- and time-prohibitive for guiding therapy selection in real time. It will be more feasible to map the tumor from any given patient onto a closely-related avatar from an established panel of representative PDXs for which the response to different therapeutic agents/strategies has already been assessed [37]. However, one key limitation of these PDXs currently is the lack of an immune component. Here we addressed whether it would be possible to find mouse avatars of the human avatars by comparing the transcriptomes of the mouse panel tumors with a panel of human breast cancer PDXs. Interestingly our Cluster 1 mouse models (MET1, M6 and some 6DT1) cluster in with the human PDXs, suggesting that with an expanded panel of mouse allograft models, this approach might be feasible.

...

p. XX

How to use the models
All models have strengths and limitations that need to be recognized so that they can be used optimally. The advantages of the mouse allograft models include that they are fully immunocompetent, there is no species incompatibility in paracrine interactions between tumor and stroma, the disease course is rapid, and metastasis burden can realistically be used as an endpoint in therapeutic intervention studies. On the negative side, the histology of the primary mouse allograft tumors is unlike that of most human breast cancers, the rapid time course may skew the biology, and the use of established cell lines may introduce bias due to selection of properties that allow propagation on plastic. However, we would argue that for the development of anti-metastatic therapies, the robust metastatic phenotype and the presence of an intact immune system trumps the other limitations of these models for now. In the future, further advances may come from the use of never-on-plastic mouse allograft models [48, 49] or metastatic PDXs in mice with reconstituted human immune systems [37]. It should also be fully appreciated that there will be no simple one-to-one mapping of any mouse model onto human cancer subtypes with respect to every characteristic. The mapping is multidimensional, with different results in different dimensions (genetic, transcriptomic, histopathology, clinical behavior etc). Model selection should be driven by which aspect of the biology is most important for the question being asked.

In summary, we have extensively characterized a panel of metastatic mouse allograft models of breast cancer that captures some of the heterogeneity of the human disease. This panel should serve as a useful platform for anti-metastatic drug screening and predictive biomarker development.
